Listen to this!
On the first day of the US–Israeli attacks on
Iran, something strange appeared on the airwaves.
A mysterious shortwave radio
broadcast: a man’s voice,
calmly reading random number sequences in Persian.
Radio enthusiasts first picked it up on
February 28, the first day of the war.
The broadcast follows a loose pattern: a
string of numbers read aloud for two rounds,
then a pause, then the Persian word
for “attention” repeated three times.
And then the numbers start again. Sometimes
it’s longer. Sometimes it’s shorter.
No one knows exactly where
the signal is coming from.
But radio enthusiasts have narrowed it
down to somewhere in Western Europe.
Five days into the war, things got even
stranger. Someone started jamming the signal.
Electronic noise suddenly flooded the frequency,
making the numbers nearly impossible to hear.
But the broadcast didn’t stop, it
just moved to a different frequency.
RFE/RL independently recorded
the transmission on March 10,
meaning it has been broadcasting
around two weeks. More or less daily.
So, what is it?
The most common explanation is something
called a “numbers station,” an
old-school Cold War spy tool,
a shortwave radio broadcast
used to send encrypted messages
to intelligence agents around the world.
Anyone can listen to the
numbers. But without the decoder,
the message is essentially
impossible to understand.
Akin Fernandez, who’s considered
a guru on the subject of “numbers
stations,” says it's “absolutely unbreakable.”
The number keys are perfectly random and figuring
it out mathematically wouldn’t really work either.
And even if you translate them into words,
the message would likely still make no
sense without the right decoder key.
OK. That’s the first thing.
What about the jamming? Who’s jamming the signal?
And why?
So, the kind of interference being
used here is called a bubble jammer.
Basically, it drowns out the signal, so the
transmission is impossible to understand.
Historically, this kind of jamming was used by
governments trying to block foreign broadcasts.
During the Cold War,
Soviet bloc countries regularly jammed
broadcasts from the BBC, Deutsche Welle
-- or Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty -- which
were beaming uncensored news and
information into the Eastern bloc.
These days, the Persian-language broadcasts
of the BBC and Radio Free Europe’s Radio Farda
are also being jammed by the Iranian
government on a similar frequency.
So, if Tehran was responsible for this
mysterious Persian numbers signal,
it’s pretty unlikely that Tehran
would be jamming its own signal.
That brings us back to the original question:
Who’s behind the numbers station broadcast?
Could be the United States sending
coded messages to agents inside Iran.
Or maybe it’s Israel.
Or how about Turkey, which is no
fan of the Iranian government?
Then it gets even muddier.
ABC News reports that the US
government had sent an alert
to law enforcement agencies about an
intercepted, encrypted transmission.
The transmissions could "be intended
to activate or provide instructions to
prepositioned sleeper assets operating
outside the originating country,”
ABC quoted the alert as saying.
The CIA did not respond to requests for comment.
So, for now, the signal remains a mystery.
What do you think? Let us know in the comments.